---
layout: post
title: Tercio
date: 2006-12-27
comments: false
---

{{ page.title }}
================

For the last couple of weeks I have been working on a little side
project called [Tercio](http://code.google.com/p/tercio/). Its meant
to be a webapp server for Erlang. Erlang, however, presents a few
twists that a web app system should take into account. The two major
aspects that need to be integrated are concurrency and OTP. With a bit
of thought you can create a system that makes use of concurrency and
allows for the use of OTP. However, I didn't want to do that. I want
to create a system that is intrinsically entwined with concurrency and
requires OTP for its best use. This takes a bit more thought. In the
end though I came up with what I think is a good approach. That is to
create a 'safe' bridge into an OTP system from javascript. This would
allow to send messages from the client into the server and receive
messages back. This isn't a new idea. Guillaume Germain created
something similar in [Termite](http://toute.ca/). However, I don't
think anyone has made it simple, performant and scalable. Which is
what I am trying to do. Fortunately I am pretty far along.

I have written a very usable
[configuration system called tconfig](http://code.google.com/p/tercio/wiki/TConfig). For
configuring tercio. I have also built in a pretty basic but working
http server for use during development. This system is based off of
the trap exit howto
["A fast web server demonstrating some undocumented Erlang features"](http://wiki.trapexit.org/index.php/A_fast_web_server_demonstrating_some_undocumented_Erlang_features). It's
called 'carre' and built into the tercio system. Its not the only way
to serve tercio apps but its by far the easiest. The configuration and
briding systems are built of a custom, fast implementation of a json
parser thats just a bit more lenient on input then the currently
available one. It also can't parse chunked data, but there is always a
trade off.

To make message passing between the client and server just a bit more
interesting I am integrating the really ingenious
[narrativejs](http://neilmix.com/narrativejs/doc/index.html) into the
system. Its written in javascript, but through the power of gcj and
rhino I have a native executable that erlang can make use of just
fine.

I am just finishing up the erlang/javascript bridge parts of
tercio. Once thats complete I will be able to start building up some
really interesting stuff.
