---
layout: post
title: Tercio
date: 2006-12-27
comments: false
tags: [erlang, web]
---

For the last couple of weeks, I have been working on a little side
project called [Tercio](http://code.google.com/p/tercio/). Its meant
to be a web app server for Erlang. Erlang, however, presents a few
twists that a web app system should take into account. The two most
important aspects that need to be integrated are concurrency and
OTP. With a bit of thought, you can create a system that makes use of
concurrency and allows for the use of OTP. However, I didn't want to
do that. I want to create a system that is intrinsically entwined with
concurrency and requires OTP for its best use. I came up with what I
think is a good approach. That is to create a 'safe' bridge into an
OTP system from javascript. This bridge would allow you to send
messages from the client to the server and receive messages back. This
bridging isn't a new idea. Guillaume Germain created something similar
in [Termite](http://toute.ca/). However, I don't think anyone has made
it simple, performant and scalable.

I have written a very usable [configuration system called
tconfig](http://code.google.com/p/tercio/wiki/TConfig). For
configuring tercio. I have also built in a pretty basic but working
http server for use during development. I based this system on the
trap exit howto ["A fast web server demonstrating some undocumented
Erlang
features"](http://wiki.trapexit.org/index.php/A_fast_web_server_demonstrating_some_undocumented_Erlang_features). It's
called 'carre' and built into the tercio system. It is not the only
way to serve tercio apps, but it is by far the easiest. I made the
configuration and briding systems with a custom, fast implementation
of a json parser thats just a bit more lenient on input then the
currently available one. It also can't parse chunked data, but there
is always a trade off.

To make message passing between the client and server just a bit more
interesting I am integrating the ingenious
[narrativejs](http://neilmix.com/narrativejs/doc/index.html) into the
system. Its written in javascript, but through the power of GCJ and
rhino I have a native executable that Erlang can make use of just
fine.

I am just finishing up the Erlang/Javascript bridge parts of
Tercio. Once that is complete, I will be able to start building
something more compelling.