---
bg: 'rocket.jpg'
layout: post
title: Problems with the Peruvian Startup Environment
tags: [philosophy,startups]
comments: true
---
Startups in Peru are struggling due to a lack of available investment,
a lack of available software engineers, and a tech/business
relationship that is inimical to the success of a software-based
technology startup.

## Introduction

To give you context for this discussion, my wife is Peruvian; I spent
two years living in Chiclayo in northern Peru between 2010 and 2012
while my wife and I were dating. My family and I still spend a month
or two a year visiting our family there. Last year, I realized that I
would probably retire in Peru. While that retirement is, hopefully,
far away, it’s better to be prepared than not prepared. I am a
technologist, usually a technical co-founder of one startup or
another. When I retire, I want to retire to a place where I won’t be
bored, a place that has a good engineering culture where exciting
things are happening. So I reached out to my network both in Peru and
in the United States. What I found is disappointing. A set of
conversations I had with several entrepreneurs when _Startup Grind
Lima_ interviewed me in September reinforced this disappointment.

The good news is that there is a lot of entrepreneurial spirit in
Peru. There are a lot of people with great ideas who are not afraid to
take risks. The bad news is that there is little to no technology
culture to support them. That bad news gets compounded by the fact
that, while their Peruvian entrepreneurs need technical co-founders,
they don’t highly value those technical co-founders.

There are two sides to this problem. One is in the technical culture
itself; the second is in the business culture and its relationship
with technological culture.

## Problems with Engineers

Universities and technical institutes train exclusively on
non-open-source technologies. The fact that everyone who comes out of
school only knows proprietary solutions seems to have set the
expectation that those proprietary cultures are the right
choice. Peruvian engineers have not yet made the cognitive switch to
open source. Probably due to this fact, the engineers also do not
train to advance themselves.

This background in proprietary solutions forces them to make
proprietary technology choices that work in the short term but are
self-limiting in the long term. For example, tech nical co-founders
will choose the Oracle Database instead of Postgresql or Mysql. They
choose Windows instead of Linux or BSD; they choose proprietary
languages such as C# instead of open languages such as Scala, Ruby,
Python, etc. The lack of knowledge of open-source solutions forces
them into a narrow, expensive channel to gather information, get
support, upgrade systems, and host software. These choices eventually
kill the startup. I spoke with one startup in a Latin American
country. The service this startup provides has a low daily hit count
and a correspondingly small number of sales per day. Their current
technology spend is in the range of $10,000–$12,000 per month. Based
on their load, I would expect their technology spending to be in the
realm of $500 to $1000 a month given their load. So, in my opinion,
their technology spending is about 10 times what I would expect it to
be. They can remain in business with this kind of spending because
their infrastructure provider is currently giving them $10,000 a month
worth of infrastructure for free—which runs out after 12 months. I
expect this startup to die within two to three months of running out
of the free period offered by their infrastructure provider. This
startup is stillborn. Poor technical decisions that shut down the
startup after a short period of success is a common problem for
startups there.


## Problems in the Relationship between Business and Technology

Problematic relationships between the business side of the house and
the technology side of the house is a problem that is not unique to
Peruvian startups. It is pervasive throughout technology companies
around the world. The business part of the organization incorrectly
orients itself with the technology part of the enterprise. In well-run
startups, especially technology startups. The business side of the
house and the technology side of the house work together to make the
startup successful. Engineers are involved in setting deadlines and
goals, informing the business what is possible and what is not. The
business is responsible for setting a direction and setting
expectations with customers. When there is a problem, the business and
technology sides of the house typically work out a solution that
allows for business continuity.

This mutually supportive and communicative relationship fails to
appear in poorly run startups. When this failure happens, the business
side of the house dictates to the technology portion of the house with
little or no consideration on whether or not it is possible. Without a
strong technology co-founder to push back, and the right culture to
allow him or her to push back, one ends up in a situation where
engineers are continuously working marathon days, direction changes
constantly, and the project doesn’t make progress. If this continues
long enough (and it usually does), the technology staff quickly burns
out and starts leaving. The company quickly ends up on a treadmill
where it is always hiring new engineers; those engineers last for a
year or so (just long enough to get productive), then burn out and
leave. This treadmill is also potentially company ending.

## Brain Drain

The final problem, and perhaps the most insidious, is brain
drain. There is massive demand for good engineering candidates all
over the world. In Peru, if an engineer overcomes all of his obstacles
to arrive at a point where the above problems no longer apply, he is
immediately snapped up and hired into the United States or
India. Staying in Peru has to be made attractive. In my experience,
engineers enjoy working on difficult problems with peers they respect
and admire and who admire them in return while making a decent
income. Creating an environment where that possibility exists seems to
be the best way to reduce brain drain

## Solving the Problems

Solving these problems is difficult and will require a multipronged
approach across many different sectors.

### English is a Prerequisite

We live in an age where access to information and the ability to
self-teach are at an unparalleled level. Anyone can teach themselves
anything, which is particularly true for anything related to
technology. Unfortunately, the vast majority of this content is in
English. English is the lingua franca of the Internet and will
continue to be for the foreseeable future.

The plethora of information available in English makes the ability to
read and write English fluently a prerequisite to anything else you
might do in this space. If you cannot access the information available
to improve yourself, your career as an engineer is stillborn.

Step one is to include a strong English requirement into any
technology program. Whether it is a degree-seeking program at a
university, a certificate at a tech school, or a coding camp, begin
with English.

### Open Source, Open Source, Open Source

University programs should focus exclusively on open-source
technologies. Focusing on open-source technologies is the only way to
provide opportunities for engineers to bootstrap themselves.

### Teach Technology Leadership

There needs to be some opportunity for engineers to learn about how to
lead. That means leading other engineers but also driving the business
to a certain extent. Engineers need to understand the value they bring
to the table and be able to ensure that that value is brought to the
organization.

### Teach Business Leadership

Organizations in Peru, and probably most Latin American countries, are
typically hierarchical. The CEO is king, his dictates are law, his
vice presidents are the princes; their dictates are the law to
everyone but the CEO and on down the chain. Top-down, hierarchical
organizations with an “ask no questions” culture is not the way to
build a successful technology company. No single person has all the
information he or she needs to make a decision. One talks and argues
and wrangles until reaching a consensus or realizing that a consensus
is impossible to reach, and the discussion is no longer valid. Once
reaching that point, the decision-maker must make a decision. Trying
to reach consensus is not a lack of leadership. In this process, the
leader (CEO, VP, etc.) must make a decision—and he or she
does. However, that leader makes that decision in the context of the
discussion and the tension of a group of invested partners.

Leading by consensus a difficult skill to learn for anyone and much
harder to learn in a culture that tends to be hierarchically
oriented. Therefore, it must be tough.

### Start Early

Changing culture for a company is mind-bogglingly difficult. Changing
culture for the industry in an entire country, much less a continent,
is something I can’t even imagine. If I stretch my mind to try think
about ways in which there is any chance of success, I arrive at the
idea that you need to start early. University is too late; high school
may even be too late. You have to start hammering on these topics
early and continue hammering on them until the person leaves the
education system.