---
bg: 'recruiting.jpg'
layout: post
title: Correctly Orienting the Recruiting Org to the Business
tags: [philosophy,startups,recruiting]
comments: true
---

Leaders of engineering organizations must design their organization in
such a way that the recruiters and those involved in the hiring
process have a vested interest in the success of the organizations
they support. At the moment, leaders seem to ignore the recruitment
and intake process, leaving it up to HR. These leaders neglect that
part of the business because they don't realize how critical it is to
the success of the enterprise. That is an insane approach that
directly comprises the ability of the organization to do business.

## Problems

There are two problems that are prevalent in the organization of most
companies. The first issue is that the recruiting arm of the business
is separate from organizations they support. The closest shared owner
is usually the CEO. This separation divorces the goals of the
recruiting organization from the aims of the business. The second
problem is individuals in the recruiting organization are rewarded
based on getting engineers in the door. Not on the quality of those
engineers or their longevity, the two things that matter to the
success of the business. Low-quality people kill businesses,
optimizing for getting bodies in the door is an excellent way to lower
the hiring bar and reduce the capacity of the company to execute.

## Having the Right Owners

HR shouldn't own recruiting. Recruiting is not an HR function, its a
function of the business. Recruiters should be as connected to the
organization they serve as possible. They should share the same
manager and the same goals as the org they serve. What this means in
practice depends on the individual companies. It may mean that there
is one recruiter to 5 or 6 teams with the recruiters and teams
reporting to a senior manager. It may mean that there is a group of
recruiters for a division of 150-200 people with the teams and
recruiters reporting to the same director.  What it should not be is
any C-level executive.

## Rewarding Recruiters for the Right Think

As an industry, we reward Recruiters based on the quantity of
candidates that they hire. Bodies in the door are not what drives a
company's success.  Recruiting and retaining high-quality individuals
is what drives the success of the enterprise.  Recruiters should be
incented based on that outcome. The annual performance of all
candidates that the recruiter has brought into the company since the
recruiter was hired, along with the turnover of those candidates should
directly drive the performance rating and related compensation changes
and bonuses of the recruiter.

## Pairing Recruiters with Engineers

Finally, recruiters are not usually experts in the domain they where
they work. A leader should pair recruiters with engineers during the
sourcing of candidates. Pairing recruiters and engineers implies that
a significant part of the responsibilities of the Engineer is
hiring. Some percentage of every engineers time should be spent in
sourcing, interviewing and hiring candidates with the support of
dedicated, rightly incentivized recruiting resources.